add release notes v1.1.0 [skip ci] (#5738)
scalameta/metals: website/blog/2023-10-11-silver.md

---
author: Katarzyna Marek
title: Metals v1.1.0 - Silver
authorImageURL: https://github.com/kasiaMarek.png
---

We're happy to announce the release of Metals v1.1.0, which brings stability fixes and takes another step towards bettering error detection and error reporting.

<table>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>Commits since last release</td>
    <td align="center">101</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Merged PRs</td>
    <td align="center">92</td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td>Contributors</td>
    <td align="center">12</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Closed issues</td>
    <td align="center"></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>New features</td>
    <td align="center"></td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

For full details: [https://github.com/scalameta/metals/milestone/60?closed=1]
(https://github.com/scalameta/metals/milestone/60?closed=1)

Metals is a language server for Scala that works with VS Code, Vim, Emacs and
Sublime Text. Metals is developed at the
[Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/) and [VirtusLab](https://virtuslab.com)

> with the help from [Lunatech](https://lunatech.com) along with contributors from

Reviewer: I think once https://github.com/scalameta/metals/pull/5747 is merged you can actually remove the 

> with the help from Lunatech

part since we're not actively working on this at the moment.

the community.

## TL;DR

Check out [https://scalameta.org/metals/](https://scalameta.org/metals/), and
give Metals a try!

> - [Support new Scala versions](#support-new-Scala-versions)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [New Scala versions support](#new-scala-versions-support)
```

- [Build server status](#build-server-status)
- [Enable run code lens for Mill build server](#enable-run-code-lens-for-Mill-build-server)
- [Convert single line comments to multiline](#convert-single-line-comments-to-multiline)
- [Detect project root](#detect-project-root)
- [Error reports in metals doctor](#error-reports-in-metals-doctor)

> - [Changes for clients](#changes-for-clients)
> - [Show bloop errors](#show-bloop-errors)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Show bloop errors](#show-bloop-errors)
- [Changes for plugin authors](#changes-for-plugin-authors)
```

## Support new Scala versions
#### Support for Scala 3.3.1

> Among other things Scala 3.3.1 adds support for JDK 16 records in Java sources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scala 3.3.1 is a new version of the Scala 3 LTS and adds support for JDK 16 records in Java sources.
```

For more information about the release take a look at
https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/releases/tag/3.3.1

#### Support for Scala 2.13.12

> Among other things Scala 2.13.12 brings actionable diagnostics - compiler suggested fixes for some errors and warnings. Actionable diagnostics are available in metals as code actions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Main improvement of Scala 2.13.12 are actionable diagnostics. They are compiler suggested fixes for some errors and warnings. Actionable diagnostics are available in metals as code actions coming directly from the compiler.
```

For more information about the release take a look at
https://github.com/scala/scala/releases/tag/v2.13.12

## Build server connection status

> Since the previous release metals detects and reports when the build server stops responding. This feature got stabilized and the information about the build server connection is now visible in the status bar. For clients that don't support this status bar yet, the error message will be displayed as before.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the previous release metals detects and reports when the build server stops responding. Over the last months this feature was stabilized and the information about the build server connection is now visible in the status bar. For clients that don't support this status bar yet, the error message will be displayed as before.
```

![bsp-status-conn](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/26606662/274277861-de46ff62-db71-4990-ba1d-bfaaadf03499.png)
*Build server connection status in VSCode, when metals is successfully connected to `sbt` build server.*

If you are a maintainer of a metals' client and want to know how to add support for build server status see [Changes for clients](#changes-for-clients).

## Enable run code lens for Mill build server

> Thanks to [Tomasz Godzik](https://github.com/tgodzik) now we have run code lens for Mill build server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thanks to [Tomasz Godzik](https://github.com/tgodzik) now we have run code lens when using Mill build server. As a reminder, it's possible to start using it by using `Metals: Switch build server command`.
```

![mill-run-lens](https://i.imgur.com/5drObNP.gif)

## Convert single line comments to multiline

Thanks to [Kasper Kondzielski](https://github.com/ghostbuster91) we have a new code action that converts a block of single line comments into a multiline comment. 

![convert-to-multiline](https://i.imgur.com/tu3B25s.gif)

## Detect project root

> Sometimes your Scala project root is not in the same folder you open your editor. Now metals will also detect the Scala project root when it is a child of the workspace/workspace folder root.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes your Scala project root is not in the same folder that you open your editor in. Now metals will also detect the Scala project root when it is a child of the workspace/workspace folder root.
```

```
. *workspace root*
├── scalaProject *detected project root*
│   ├── .sbt
│   ├── src/main/scala
│   │   ├── Main.scala
│   │   └── ...
│   └── ...
├── someOtherProject
│   └── ...
├── .gitignore
└── ...
```
## Error reports in metals doctor

> Error reports are now visible in the metals doctor to help users diagnose the cause of an issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Error reports are now visible in the metals doctor to help users diagnose the cause of any potential issue. Previously, they would only exist in the `.metals/reports` folder.
```

![show-error-reports](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/26606662/270966990-86cbd199-8621-4d04-a4ae-41f4bb598668.gif)

## Show bloop errors

> Before this release bloop errors would only be logged into `metals.log`. Now for the sake of visibility bloop errors are shown to the users in form of error messages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before this release Bloop build server errors would only be logged silently into `metals.log` or the Metals output. Now for the sake of visibility bloop errors are also shown to the users in form of error messages. The message can be dismissed for the current session of Metals or you can turn off all messages in a workspace.
```
